README.md, before:

# TinyGo WebAssembly with WASI Preview2

This repository contains a demonstration of running Go code in a browser using WebAssembly with WASI Preview2 support via TinyGo.

## Repository Contents

- **main.go**: A simple Go program that outputs a greeting message
- **build scripts**:
  - `build-go.bash`: Compiles the Go code to WebAssembly using TinyGo
  - `build-js.bash`: Transpiles the WASM module to JavaScript using JCO
  - `build-browser.bash`: Bundles and serves the web application
  - `serve.bash`: Main script that runs all build steps and serves the demo

- **Web files**:
  - `index.html`: Browser interface for the demo
  - `main.ts`: TypeScript code that loads and runs the WASM module

## Prerequisites

- TinyGo
- wasm-tools
- @bytecodealliance/jco (Node.js package)
- esbuild

## Running the Demo

To build and run the demo, simply execute:

```bash
./serve.bash
```

This will:
1. Compile the Go code to WebAssembly
2. Transpile the WASM module to JavaScript
3. Bundle the web application
4. Start a local server (typically on port 8000)

Open your browser to the displayed URL to see the demo in action.

## How It Works

This demo showcases how to bridge Go and WebAssembly with WASI Preview2, allowing Go code to run in browser environments with access to system interfaces like stdout through the WebAssembly System Interface standard.

The TypeScript code sets up the necessary WASI Preview2 interfaces (stdin, stdout, stderr, clocks, etc.) that the Go code expects, enabling seamless execution in the browser.

### Importing Wasi Functions

Tinygo uses this construct internally to import functions from the "imports" structure:

```go
//go:wasmimport wasi:io/poll@0.2.0 [method]pollable.ready
//go:noescape
func wasmimport_PollableReady(self0 uint32) (result0 uint32)
```

## Active Challenges

### Nonblocking I/O

When we call "time.Sleep" in Go this results in calling monotonic-clock
subscribeDuration which is currently stubbed in the wasip2 shim implementation
from bytecodealliance. Even worse, this depends on block() in Pollable.

Pollable is something from the host environment that the wasm code can wait for.
It has a single function block() which is supposed to block until the event
occurs, then return. The problem is that the JavaScript environment in the web
browser doesn't have blocking within a function call, it must return right away.
We can't block returning from block().

One option to fix this is to transform blocking I/O calls into async calls. jco
supports this experimentally with the `--async-mode jspi` (JavaScript Promise
Integration) flag. We then can set the poll function as async with
`--async-imports wasi:io/poll#[method]pollable.block` - then we get something
like `const trampoline0 = new WebAssembly.Suspending(async function(arg0) {`
with an `await pollable.block()` inside.

[The announcement for jspi] and [the jspi spec] describes how it is supposed to
work. The problem is: **WebAssembly.Suspending** is not implemented in Chrome or
Firefox as of 03/12/2025. It is currently in a [jspi origin trial] in Chrome,
ending in July 2025, so this is an extremely bleeding edge feature that is not
yet widely supported. See [jspi proposal] for more details.

[The announcement for jspi]: https://v8.dev/blog/jspi
[the jspi spec]: https://github.com/WebAssembly/js-promise-integration/blob/main/proposals/js-promise-integration/Overview.md
[jspi origin trial]: https://developer.chrome.com/origintrials/#/view_trial/1603844417297317889
[jspi proposal]: https://github.com/WebAssembly/js-promise-integration

The latest update on jspi can be found in the [extent to extend experiment]
email on the Blink mailing list in which, as of January 29, 2025:

> SPI has been inherently hard to specify, and validate security requirements
> for given that it is somewhat sandwiched between JS & Wasm. Concretely, since
> the last OT extension, the late breaking changes have been merged into the
> specification and we've gotten more signals about the exploitable security
> surface of JSPI (OT features are treated as shipped features for V8), and we'd
> like to focus on hardening security ahead of an intent to ship.
>
> ~ Deepti Gandluri

[extent to extend experiment]: https://groups.google.com/a/chromium.org/g/blink-dev/c/ke9rpIdSTwI/m/pq9PnNtCAAAJ

Since jspi is not yet supported and there's apparently no way to return
asynchronously from a call from wasm => javascript I guess the only way to make
this work is to force all the calls out of Go to be synchronous in nature and
handle the async with a callback calling into the Go runtime from outside of
wasm when the promise resolves. (Is this even possible?)

### Blocking I/O

There is actually a way to block JavaScript in the web browser; we can use
[Atomics.wait] with a SharedArrayBuffer to block the JS thread. This is
supported in all major browsers but requires [secure context] and [cross-origin
isolated] headers. This would require two coopoerating Worker where one Worker
sets up the JavaScript async Promise callbacks and the other (wasm) uses
Atomics.wait to block the wasm function call until the Promise resolves.

[Atomics.wait]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Atomics/wait
[SharedArrayBuffer]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/SharedArrayBuffer
[secure context]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Security/Secure_Contexts
[cross-origin isolated]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Window/crossOriginIsolated

## WebWorker with Atomics.wait Implementation

This branch contains an advanced implementation of the Atomics.wait approach for synchronous blocking in the browser using a WebWorker architecture:

1. **WebWorker Execution**: The WASM module runs in a dedicated WebWorker thread, leaving the main thread responsive
2. **WASI Preview2 Compliance**: We've implemented the missing parts of the WASI Preview2 interfaces for clocks and polling
3. **Proper Interface Chain**: Our implementation follows the proper call chain from time.Sleep through WASI interfaces
4. **Synchronous Blocking**: Uses SharedArrayBuffer and Atomics.wait to provide true synchronous blocking
5. **Cross-thread Communication**: Uses postMessage for communication between main thread and worker
6. **Cross-origin Isolation**: The server is configured with required COOP/COEP headers for SharedArrayBuffer support

This implementation allows standard Go code using `time.Sleep` to work without modification by implementing the underlying WASI interfaces that TinyGo uses.

### Key Components

- `main.ts`: Sets up the main thread that creates the WebWorker
- `shim/browser/worker.ts`: WebWorker that loads and runs the WASM module
- `shim/browser/clocks.ts`: Implements the monotonic-clock interface with `subscribeDuration` that returns a Pollable
- `shim/browser/poll.ts`: Implements the Pollable interface with a `block()` method using Atomics.wait
- `build-browser.bash`: Sets up a server with appropriate headers for cross-origin isolation

### Implementation Flow

1. Main thread creates a WebWorker and initializes it
2. WebWorker loads and runs the WASM module
3. Go code in WASM calls `time.Sleep(duration)`
4. TinyGo runtime calls WASI's `monotonic-clock.subscribeDuration(duration)`
5. Our shim returns a Pollable object
6. TinyGo runtime calls `pollable.block()` on that object
7. The worker thread sends a message to the main thread with the operation details and a SharedArrayBuffer
8. The main thread handles the timer operation asynchronously
9. Meanwhile, the worker thread blocks synchronously using Atomics.wait on the SharedArrayBuffer
10. When the operation completes, the main thread notifies the worker by setting a value in the SharedArrayBuffer
11. The worker wakes up from Atomics.wait and continues execution

This architecture provides several benefits:
- The main thread remains responsive during blocking operations
- True synchronous blocking is achieved in the worker thread
- The application follows standard WASI interfaces
- Complex operations can be handled asynchronously by the main thread while appearing synchronous to the WASM code

Commit message:

simplify by allowing atomics wait to timeout
Signed-off-by: Christian Stewart <christian@aperture.us>

README.md, after:

# TinyGo WebAssembly with WASI Preview2

This repository contains a demonstration of running Go code in a browser using WebAssembly with WASI Preview2 support via TinyGo.

## Repository Contents

- **main.go**: A simple Go program that outputs a greeting message
- **build scripts**:
  - `build-go.bash`: Compiles the Go code to WebAssembly using TinyGo
  - `build-js.bash`: Transpiles the WASM module to JavaScript using JCO
  - `build-browser.bash`: Bundles and serves the web application
  - `serve.bash`: Main script that runs all build steps and serves the demo

- **Web files**:
  - `index.html`: Browser interface for the demo
  - `main.ts`: TypeScript code that loads and runs the WASM module

## Prerequisites

- TinyGo
- wasm-tools
- @bytecodealliance/jco (Node.js package)
- esbuild

## Running the Demo

To build and run the demo, simply execute:

```bash
./serve.bash
```

This will:
1. Compile the Go code to WebAssembly
2. Transpile the WASM module to JavaScript
3. Bundle the web application
4. Start a local server (typically on port 8000)

Open your browser to the displayed URL to see the demo in action.

## How It Works

This demo showcases how to bridge Go and WebAssembly with WASI Preview2, allowing Go code to run in browser environments with access to system interfaces like stdout through the WebAssembly System Interface standard.

The TypeScript code sets up the necessary WASI Preview2 interfaces (stdin, stdout, stderr, clocks, etc.) that the Go code expects, enabling seamless execution in the browser.

### Importing Wasi Functions

Tinygo uses this construct internally to import functions from the "imports" structure:

```go
//go:wasmimport wasi:io/poll@0.2.0 [method]pollable.ready
//go:noescape
func wasmimport_PollableReady(self0 uint32) (result0 uint32)
```

## Active Challenges

### Nonblocking I/O

When we call "time.Sleep" in Go this results in calling monotonic-clock
subscribeDuration which is currently stubbed in the wasip2 shim implementation
from bytecodealliance. Even worse, this depends on block() in Pollable.

Pollable is something from the host environment that the wasm code can wait for.
It has a single function block() which is supposed to block until the event
occurs, then return. The problem is that the JavaScript environment in the web
browser doesn't have blocking within a function call, it must return right away.
We can't block returning from block().

One option to fix this is to transform blocking I/O calls into async calls. jco
supports this experimentally with the `--async-mode jspi` (JavaScript Promise
Integration) flag. We then can set the poll function as async with
`--async-imports wasi:io/poll#[method]pollable.block` - then we get something
like `const trampoline0 = new WebAssembly.Suspending(async function(arg0) {`
with an `await pollable.block()` inside.

[The announcement for jspi] and [the jspi spec] describes how it is supposed to
work. The problem is: **WebAssembly.Suspending** is not implemented in Chrome or
Firefox as of 03/12/2025. It is currently in a [jspi origin trial] in Chrome,
ending in July 2025, so this is an extremely bleeding edge feature that is not
yet widely supported. See [jspi proposal] for more details.

[The announcement for jspi]: https://v8.dev/blog/jspi
[the jspi spec]: https://github.com/WebAssembly/js-promise-integration/blob/main/proposals/js-promise-integration/Overview.md
[jspi origin trial]: https://developer.chrome.com/origintrials/#/view_trial/1603844417297317889
[jspi proposal]: https://github.com/WebAssembly/js-promise-integration

The latest update on jspi can be found in the [extent to extend experiment]
email on the Blink mailing list in which, as of January 29, 2025:

> SPI has been inherently hard to specify, and validate security requirements
> for given that it is somewhat sandwiched between JS & Wasm. Concretely, since
> the last OT extension, the late breaking changes have been merged into the
> specification and we've gotten more signals about the exploitable security
> surface of JSPI (OT features are treated as shipped features for V8), and we'd
> like to focus on hardening security ahead of an intent to ship.
>
> ~ Deepti Gandluri

[extent to extend experiment]: https://groups.google.com/a/chromium.org/g/blink-dev/c/ke9rpIdSTwI/m/pq9PnNtCAAAJ

Since jspi is not yet supported and there's apparently no way to return
asynchronously from a call from wasm => javascript I guess the only way to make
this work is to force all the calls out of Go to be synchronous in nature and
handle the async with a callback calling into the Go runtime from outside of
wasm when the promise resolves. (Is this even possible?)

### Blocking I/O

There is actually a way to block JavaScript in the web browser; we can use
[Atomics.wait] with a SharedArrayBuffer to block the JS thread. This is
supported in all major browsers but requires [secure context] and [cross-origin
isolated] headers. This would require two coopoerating Worker where one Worker
sets up the JavaScript async Promise callbacks and the other (wasm) uses
Atomics.wait to block the wasm function call until the Promise resolves.

[Atomics.wait]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Atomics/wait
[SharedArrayBuffer]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/SharedArrayBuffer
[secure context]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Security/Secure_Contexts
[cross-origin isolated]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Window/crossOriginIsolated

## Simplified Atomics.wait Implementation

This branch contains a simplified implementation of the Atomics.wait approach for synchronous blocking in the browser:

1. **WebWorker Execution**: The WASM module runs in a dedicated WebWorker thread, leaving the main thread responsive
2. **WASI Preview2 Compliance**: We've implemented the missing parts of the WASI Preview2 interfaces for clocks and polling
3. **Proper Interface Chain**: Our implementation follows the proper call chain from time.Sleep through WASI interfaces
4. **Synchronous Blocking**: Uses SharedArrayBuffer and Atomics.wait to provide true synchronous blocking
5. **Cross-origin Isolation**: The server is configured with required COOP/COEP headers for SharedArrayBuffer support

This implementation allows standard Go code using `time.Sleep` to work without modification by implementing the underlying WASI interfaces that TinyGo uses.

### Key Components

- `main.ts`: Sets up the main thread that creates the WebWorker
- `shim/browser/worker.ts`: WebWorker that loads and runs the WASM module
- `shim/browser/clocks.ts`: Implements the monotonic-clock interface with `subscribeDuration` that returns a Pollable
- `shim/browser/poll.ts`: Implements the Pollable interface with a `block()` method using Atomics.wait with timeout
- `build-browser.bash`: Sets up a server with appropriate headers for cross-origin isolation

### Implementation Flow

1. Main thread creates a WebWorker and initializes it
2. WebWorker loads and runs the WASM module
3. Go code in WASM calls `time.Sleep(duration)`
4. TinyGo runtime calls WASI's `monotonic-clock.subscribeDuration(duration)`
5. Our shim returns a Pollable object
6. TinyGo runtime calls `pollable.block()` on that object
7. The Pollable's block method uses Atomics.wait with a timeout set to the desired duration
8. The worker thread blocks synchronously until Atomics.wait times out after the specified duration
9. Execution continues after the timeout
